Whether playing in the yard, wrestling in the living room or exploring their territory, Irish Terriers exhibit lots of energy and personality. Full of love and spirit, they form incredibly strong bonds with their families. Irish Terriers also have a natural courage and protectiveness that make excellent watchdogs. With plenty of love, attention and training, an Irish Terrier becomes a friend for life.
Irish Terrier
Quick Facts
    weight: 23 - 30 pounds
    height: 15 - 19 inches
Ideal Human Companions
        Active, sporty types
        City dwellers
        Families with older children
Irish Terriers on Dogster

ADD YOURS
Trademark Traits

        Protective
        Forms strong bonds
        Intelligent
        Energetic
        Bold

Things You Should Know

Irish Terriers need vigorous exercise and “tasks” to maintain a stable mind and body. Take them jogging, walking and running any time of day. If you like to hike in the woods, they make excellent exploring buddies.

Irish Terriers can live as long as 14 years with few genetic health problems. They are fairly easy to groom, and they don’t shed too heavily. Brush them regularly and take them for a professional grooming several times a year.
Irish Terrier History

Believed to be one of the oldest terrier breeds, the Irish Terrier was originally used in its native country to herd sheep, hunt small game, guard property and provide companionship. Cherished for hundreds of years for their intelligence, protectiveness and style, Irish Terriers continue to win hearts in shows and homes around the world.
The Look of a Irish Terrier

Irish Terriers have elegant, medium-sized frames covered in dense, curly coats that come in solid shades of red or light brown. They have broad, flat heads with long, full muzzles. Their V-shaped ears usually bend forward, and their sharp eyes are small and dark. They have long, muscular necks that slope down to deep chests and short backs. Their tails, sometimes docked, are carried high. Overall, the Irish Terrier has a rugged but graceful look.