"You can never be in good enough shape when you're a race car driver," says Kevin Buckler. "This is a young man's sport." The 50-year-old founder of California-based TRG Motor Sports has been racing cars for 17 years and has won major championship titles, including the Rolex 24 Hours of Daytona in 2003.

This year he drove in the Daytona 250 and Monterey Historicas, but over the past five years, Mr. Buckler has taken a step back from racing, allowing new drivers to compete in TRG MotorSports' 130-plus races a year. He still participates in a handful of races and tests his team's vehicles before almost every competition. Mr. Buckler says it takes a "death grip" to control the wheel of a 185-mile-per-hour vehicle. "There's no way you can sustain driving for two hours straight if you're not in top shape," he says.

Mr. Buckler spends at least 250 days a year on the road, so he has tweaked his workout so he can travel with it. He keeps a pair of running shoes and a bike in his motor coach and in his Charlotte, N.C., and Marin Country, Calif., homes. He also carries a pair of rubber resistance bands in his suitcase so he can get in a strength workout when he is away from a gym.

In 1999, Mr. Buckler founded Adobe Road Winery in Petaluma, Calif., giving him even more incentive to stick to his workouts. "Being a winemaker and eating lavish meals tend to go hand in hand," he says. His boutique winery makes 11 styles of wines and is known for its Syrah and Cabernet Sauvignon.

Mr. Buckler is married and has three daughters. He stands 5-foot-8 and weighs 150 pounds.

The Workout

Mr. Buckler does 20 to 25 minutes of strength training every day. He will perform eight to 12 different types of upper body exercises, completing one set of 10 to 15 repetitions. Rather than rest between exercises, he will do some type of core exercise. "Upper-body strength is extremely important because my arms need to be powerful enough to steer and control the wheels of the car," he says, noting that he also needs to be strong enough to climb or pull himself out of a race car if it crashes.

A sample workout may start with him bench pressing 90 to 100 pounds for 20 repetitions, then moving to the floor to complete 30 sit ups and 30 push ups. Next he might do a lateral pull down for 15 repetitions and then complete side crunches, 15 on each side, and 12 chin-ups. He might then do bicep curls with dumbbells and back extensions on a stability ball, followed by crunches on the ball.

"The idea is to keep moving so strength becomes a mini cardio workout," he says.

Mr. Buckler finishes off his routine with 20 to 30 minutes of brisk cardio. When he is in a gym, he uses a stationary bike, stair stepper or treadmill. When he is on the road or at the race track, he goes for a run outside or for a ride on his mountain bike. The 3.56-mile track at Daytona is his favorite course to run. "People aren't actually allowed to run on the road course, but I'm there so early that there isn't anyone to stop me between 3 and 4 a.m.," he says.

He always carries his rubber resistance bands, which he can use in place of dumbbells and strength machines when a gym is not available. If a hotel has a wheelchair-accessible room, he requests it because it has the large rails to tie his bands to. If not, he uses the doorknobs.

When Mr. Buckler is going to drive in a race, he increases his cardio sessions and tries to run midday in hotter temperatures to prepare himself for the sweltering temperatures of the racecar. When at home in California, he water-skis or wakeboards at least once a day.
The Diet

Mr. Buckler usually eats Life cereal or Cheerios topped with blueberries or bananas for breakfast. "If I have eggs I pull the yolks to avoid the extra cholesterol," he says. For lunch, he buys pre-cut vegetables like bell peppers, lettuce, cauliflower and cherry tomatoes, and tosses them in a bowl with a light dressing. He always packs his suitcase with dried mango and papaya, peanuts and granola bars for snacks. "That's five hours of energy in there to get me through plane rides or long meetings," he says.

His reward for eating sensibly the first half of the day is a splurge in the evening—often on steak. "Dinner is my weakness," he says. "But I do try to keep the portions small." Mr. Buckler enjoys a glass of wine in the evenings, too, usually selecting something from his personal 5,000-bottle cellar. "I'm the palate of the winery so it's part of my job to be tasting not just my own wines, but also other wines," he says.
Cost and Gear

Mr. Buckler sticks to simple workout gear. He likes 100% cotton shorts and shirts, and buys Nike running shoes. Rather than purchase a new pair of shoes every two months, he keeps a few pairs on rotation.

Mr. Buckler has a gym in his office and home in California. He is nearly as obsessed with his bikes as he is with his race cars. He spent about $500 apiece on two Trek and two GT mountain bikes. He also just bought a $92,000 boat for skiing and wakeboarding.
Fitness Tip

Mr. Buckler believes in consistency. "Don't find an excuse not to do the workout," he says. "You can always make time if you're committed." On the last day of the season at the Miami Speedway, he had a 6 a.m. flight; he was up at 3 a.m. so he could squeeze in a workout. "Rather than think about how early it is and how tired I am, I think about the positives like getting to look at the stars in silence," he says.
Quick Fix

If he only has 10 minutes, he will create a compact workout and do three upper-body exercises and three core exercises. That might be push ups, then bicep curls and rowing motions using resistance bands, followed by three types of crunches. He will do this circuit with little to no rest in between sets.
The Playlist

"My wife and kids laugh because my iPod is loaded with '60s and '70s rock: ACDC, Led Zeppelin, The Eagles, The Doors," he says. "I turn it on and just tune everything else out."